---
layout: post
title: My guilty love affair with food hack videos
date:   2020-10-08
permalink: /blog/tech/TECH00001
---

## **My Guilty Love Affair With Food Hack Videos**

I have a confession to make: I love food hack videos. Put a viral cooking video on my Twitter feed and I will lose whole minutes just staring at pairs of disembodied, improbably well-manicured hands as they chop, stir, and drizzle various brightly-coloured substances onto shining white plates. There is something unspeakably soothing about these videos, which transport the viewer to a world where cooking is magic and ordinary people can turn things into other, better things with seemingly no mess, waste, or effort. Condensed milk, microwaved for ten minutes, transforms into perfectly smooth, golden-brown caramel; melted strawberry ice cream is whipped into creamy pink icing with nothing more than two scoops of flour and an electric whisk. aIn the land of food hack videos, every food item is photogenic, every recipe takes ten minutes or less, and there are never any dishes to wash. 



None of this, of course, is true. Anyone who has ever cooked a meal will know that cooking is a messy, time-consuming process, and that real food very seldom comes off a pan or out of an oven looking ready for Instagram. Food hack videos aren’t just unrealistic, however: many of them are also actively untruthful. From food vloggers and lifestyle bloggers to the BBC, numerous sources agree: food hacks usually do *not* work, and following them will, at best, leave you with a disappointing meal. At worst, you might end up cooking something downright inedible – or even burning down your kitchen.



What, then, must become of my guilty love affair? Can I still watch these videos? Can I really justify spending long minutes watching someone *pretend* to cook food I now know to be fake – and enjoy it? I think, surprisingly, that the answer is yes. For all that they claimed to be truth, food hack videos have always, to me at least, been nothing more than entertainment. Entertainment doesn’t have to be true to be fun: a beautifully-shot film of rose-tinted liquid being slowly poured from a gleaming silver pot will always be enjoyable to watch, whether or not that liquid really is what it claims to be. These videos may lie, yes, but there can be pleasure in being lied to. And, now that I know the truth, these lies hardly seem dangerous. Misinformation can only hurt me if I believe it. 

The problem, though, is that misinformation isn’t always so easy to spot – or to reject. Think of the many films each year which claim to be “based on a true story”. Logically, we know that most if not all of these “true stories” have been heavily edited, and that each of these films contains as much fiction as fact. It’s not that these films are trying to lie to us; it’s just that satisfying fiction is often much neater than real life, and for that reason even the most carefully-researched of films will have changed some facts to fit the story. Despite knowing this, however, we are often more than willing to treat these films as truthful records of events. I know that I, at least, am guilty of this; after watching one of these films, I often find myself googling the real-life events that inspired it, noting the film’s inconsistencies, and then completely – and sometimes deliberately – forgetting all about them. Of course I *believe* these facts, and I can tell the difference between movies and reality; but it was the film that I enjoyed, and so it will be the film, and its version of events, that I remember. 



What this shows, I think, is that these films and food hack videos have something in common: they are compelling precisely *because* they are unreal. Food hack videos are prettier and cleaner and more satisfying than real cooking is because they are *not* real cooking, and so they can do things that would be impossible in a real kitchen. Likewise, fictionalised versions of real events can, unlike real life, be edited and neatened, made funnier or sadder or more dramatic; as these stories get further from reality, they also become more interesting and fun than reality can be. Facts are often messy, boring, and frustrating; they can ruin a good video, or a good, satisfying story. It is for that very reason that, sometimes, an untrue story can become easier to believe than a true one. 



It is for this reason that we must be careful when we choose to believe something that *sounds* true, or comforting, or just like good common sense. We are constantly being bombarded with narratives and information: from our communities, on our social media feeds, in the news. It might be easy, and feel satisfying, to latch on to the things that look and sound the best; but, just as things don’t have to be true to be enjoyable, the things that we enjoy may well be untrue. In fact, we may find that untrue stories fulfil our desires and fit into our worldviews more neatly than true ones do. That, however, doesn’t make them real. 



So no, I don’t intend to give up on food hack videos. I just like them too much. But, more importantly, they remind me that not everything I like to think about, or want to believe, has its basis in reality. In fact, by forcing me to face up to my own enjoyment of obvious untruths, they make my commitment to facts much, well, bigger than before. 



Remember: information literacy and critical thinking are *not* the enemy of fun, so be sure to check the facts before starting fires in your kitchen! 



<h2>References:</h2>

https://nymag.com/intelligencer/2019/07/the-egg-is-bigger-than-before-what-is-5-minute-crafts.html

https://www.huffpost.com/entry/life-hack-fail-toaster_n_56541ec2e4b0d4093a590b2d

https://thekidshouldseethis.com/post/debunking-fake-kitchen-hacks-bbc-click

https://www.bbc.com/news/av/technology-51504484

 

***This article was written by Kimberley Chiu.***  

***Kimberley is the Associate Librarian in charge of the adult collection at Ang Mo Kio Public Library. She likes cats, books, and coffee, and spends most of her free time reading fanfiction and watching overlong videos on YouTube. She co-hosts a podcast on film adaptations, and is currently working on a novel.***

****

​     

 